## amd64 5-Level Paging Structures support ##

Link:	 [Patch](https://reviews.freebsd.org/D25273)  
Link:	 [Intel SDM](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/intel-sdm.html)  
Link:	 [Intel whitepaper](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/download/5-level-paging-and-5-level-ept-white-paper.html)  

Contact: Konstantin Belousov <kib@FreeBSD.org>  

Since its introduction, x86 Long Mode (AKA 64bit execution mode, amd64 
in FreeBSD terminology) uses 4-level paging structures, which provides
48 https://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/?s=Things+I+Wont+Work+Withbits of virtual address space (LA48).  FreeBSD evenly divides the
space between userspace and kernel, giving both 47 virtual address
bits.

In near future Intel CPUs will start providing 5-level paging
structures, i.e. giving 57 bits for virtual addresses (LA57).  This
means, with preservation of the existing divide between KVA and UVA,
56 bit for UVA, or 2^9 = 512 times more virtual memory.

The amd64 pmap was modified to support both LA48 and LA57, defaulting
to LA57 if hardware supports it.  The tunable is provided to force
using LA48 even if hardware can do LA57.

The most interesting part of the patch is the switch from boot paging
mode to LA57.  Loaders, either legacy or UEFI, pass control to the
kernel in Long Mode, which implies that the paging is turned on.  This
neccessarily means that it is LA48 mode.  SDM states that paging mode
cannot be switched while Long Mode is active, so kernel has to create
new page table structures, turn Long Mode off, then load new %cr3 and
finally re-enable Long Mode.

I decided to only provide the larger virtual address space to usermode
for the initial step, leaving KVA layout intact. The main motivation
is that changing KVA arrangements requires changing the auto-tuning
settings, which deserve separate work.  After this was decided,
creating a 5-level paging structure for kernel pmap from existing
4-level one is quite straightforward; we need to add one page for
top level, fill one PML5 entry to point to existing PML4 page, and
fill the famous self-referential entry for vtopte()/vtopde().

Care was taken to provide binary compatible layout of UVA for binaries
that cannot be executed correctly with larger address space.  For
instance, programs could have knowledge about used bits in the
addresses and used upper bits for other data, or implemented
compressed pointers.  Even if system runs in LA57 mode, specific
binary can request LA48-compatible UVA by procctl(2) or by the flag in
the FreeBSD features ELF note.

Since I do not have access to a machine with LA57, development was
done using QEMU.  It would be interesting to try it on the real
hardware.

Sponsor: The FreeBSD Foundation  
