## 4G/4G address space split for i386  ##
Contact: Konstantin Belousov, <kib@freebsd.org>
Link:	 None

i386, as most other 32bit FreeBSD architectures, starts suffering from
the grow of software during the recent decade.  Althought 32bit
execution environments, when 32bit address space is enough, are still
have an advantage over the 64bit one, at least due to the smaller
memory traffic and more economical use of caches, it is harder to
provide the self-hosting i386 system build.  

Our i386 kernel so far split the 4G address space of the platform into
3G (without 4M) accessible to userspace, and 1G for kernel itself.  In
other words, neither kernel nor userspace got full 4G. The programs
like clang and lld, require very large virtual address space for
linking, 3G is not enough for them.  Kernel have trouble fitting into
1G limitation with the modern sizing for network buffers, ZFS and
other KVA-hungry in-kernel code.

In FreeBSD 12, i386 now provides dedicated address spaces for
userspace and kernel, giving each mode full 4G (- 8M) of usable
addresses.  The userspace on i386 now has the same resources as
compat32 on amd64 kernel, and there is much more breathing space for
the kernel itself.

We use two PDEs shared between modes, one for mapping the page table,
another for the mode switching trampoline and other required system
tables like GDT/IDT/TSS which must be mapped always.  Significant
change required for the locore code, which page table creation part
was completely rewritten and moved from assembler to C, aiding in
readability.

Since user address space is no longer shared with the kernel,
copyout(9) functions needed to be rewritten, making transient mapping
of userspace pages for duration of accesses.  Initial implementation
used vm_fault_quick_hold_pages() framework, but was later optimized
for faster small block copying by hand-written assembler routines
which temporary switched to user mode mappings from trampoline.

Future plans for maintanence of i386 include making i386 pmap capable
of runtime selection of PAE/non-PAE page table format, bringing NX
mappings for regular i386 kernel.

The work was sponsored by The FreeBSD Foundation.
