## mlx5 Drivers Update ##

Contact: Slava Shwartsman, Hans Petter Selasky, Konstantin Belousov <freebsd-drivers@mellanox.com>  

Link:	 [Mellanox OFED for FreeBSD Documentation](http://www.mellanox.com/page/products_dyn?product_family=193&mtag=freebsd_driver)  

The mlx5 driver provides support for PCI Express adapters based on
ConnectX-4(LX), ConnectX-5(EX) and ConnectX-6(DX).
The mlx5en driver provides support for Ethernet and the mlx5ib driver provides
support for InfiniBand and RDMA over Converged Ethernet, RoCE.

Following updates done in mlx5 drivers:

  * Added support for ConnectX-6 and ConnectX-6dx devices, which support of
    up to 200Gb/s interface speeds!
  * Added TLS hardware offload support for ConnectX-6dx devices.  TLS Tx
    crypto offload is a new feature for network devices. It enables the kernel
    TLS socket to skip encryption and authentication operations on the transmit
    side of the data path, delegating those to the NIC. In turn, the network
    adapter encrypts packets that belong to an offloaded TLS socket on the fly.
    The Mellanox network adapter does not modify any packet headers. It expects
    to receive fully framed TCP packets with TLS records as payload. The NIC
    replaces plaintext with ciphertext and fills the authentication tag. The
    adapter does not hold any state beyond the context needed to encrypt the
    next expected packet, i.e. expected TCP sequence number and crypto state.
  * Add support for Dynamic Receive Queue Interrupt Moderation.  Dynamic
    Interrupt Moderation (DIM) refers to any action made by hardware and/or
    software on run time to control interrupt rate on the system. The
    moderation action itself should not interfere with the system's operation
    and should not require any human interaction. In networking, dynamic
    interrupt moderation is used for controlling the rate of interrupts
    generated by the hardware for multiple traffic scenarios.
  * Enhanced support for self-healing mechanism:
    In a rare occasion when Mellanox network adapters fail, due to a firmware
    bug for example, the driver will sense the catastrophic error.  As
    a result of this failure detection, the device driver can
    trigger a firmware reset for the device so it can recover - without the
    need to reboot the entire host.
  * Added support for in-driver firmware updating using mlx5tool.


Sponsor: Mellanox Technologies  
